---
title: 'Wide Ripple Effects of Pricing Strategy at AWS'
date: 2025-07-09
permalink: /posts/2025/07/Pricing-Impact/
tags:
category: econ
---

Product: Cloud Computing
Target Market: Developers
New or existing: Modified existing product
Value creating or cost saving: Immediately cost saving but creates value over time as more value was created by firms in other industries. 
Change: Pricing basis - from large costs upfront via procurement to on the go scalable.


Pricing strategy has the power not only to influence sales for a product but to restructure an entire industry. Pricing is the mechanism that determines who can afford to participate in an industry, how fast they can scale and risks they inherently take, and altogether that can reshape the broader economy. This was illuminated when Amazon Web Services (AWS) eased barriers to cloud computing by replacing large upfront capital purchases and fixed-term hosting contracts with usage-based, on-demand pricing. 
 
The internet reshaped how people transact, communicate and exchange information,.  Amazon Prime (2005) gave subscribers access to free two-day shipping on hundreds of thousands of items and the iPhone (2007) dropped the internet into every hand. The internet was creating new needs where they didn't exist as Facebook created new ways to network and businesses sought to harness digitalization for product development, marketing and creating new channels with online shopping.

Before 2006, computing required heavy investments in capital and forecasting of the right amount of storage capacity and compute power so that businesses could secure sufficient server equipment or else risk being ill-prepared for surges resulting in missed business opportunities. On the other hand, overshooting compute needs meant computing infrastructure sat idly waste. For firms in some industries like accounting, compute needs vary seasonally and for startups the future carries more general uncertainty furthering the risk of capital gone to waste. The previous model hindered the ability to scale quickly. 

Amazon Web Services (est. 2006) changed this equation to one that shared more value by restructuring the price basis to any amount available for purchase on-demand. Instead of having to forecast some amount for a future period,  firms could purchase the storage and computing power they need from AWS for use right away and could easily scale up or down as moderated by their needs. Before AWS, if a product or service went viral, the firm would need to purchase or rent additional servers through a procurement process but AWS, storage could be allocated via API with cloud computing (the "cloud" just means someone else's computers). 


Andy Jassy (first CEO of AWS), 
>	“Amazon S3 is based on the idea that quality Internet-based storage should be taken for granted. It helps free developers from worrying about where they are going to store data, whether it will be safe and secure, if it will be available when they need it, the costs associated with server maintenance, or whether they have enough storage available. Amazon S3 enables developers to focus on innovating with data, rather than figuring out how to store it.”
